- Don't go too far, Illian!

The girl ignored the warning as was usual, never answering, always going
deeper. There was something about the tunnel which made her creep forward, day
after day, lighting her many stops with Everfyre as she needed time to move
obstacles and rest and eat lunch.

On good days, she could reach the 15k mark before a single flare burned out. On
less-good days, she would inevitably trip on debris, curse herself and others
for not clearing the way properly, lose the flare, fumble with her pockets to
find another, feel just generally tired, or even find an old book that was not
too shabby and sit there, reading. She prefered good days, though: the thrill
of potentially discovering many-a-thing among the age-old dust, or of finding
the ever-unlikely-but-oft-rumored fork in the road, offset everything else.

And on the walk went. This particular day, she would only reach the 10k mark
before stopping and starting back. She had planned to go all the way to the end
and continue creating a way through the mess she had hit the previous day. It
wasn't the worse she had seen, but it was pretty bad: the rubble was dense but
light, and each move, each step, would cause clouds of white dust and dirt to
billow up and settle down on coats and arms and legs, and irritate the throat
and nose of the only living thing in there. She had planned to go with tools,
but the weight and space required meant she had left her Everfyres behind. She
had figured she wouldn't need them. And on any other day she would have figured
right.

On that day, though, she was perplexed to find a wall of darkness greeting her
just over half a k from the 10k mark. The Everfyres never failed; the name
kinda sorta implied that! The only plausible explanation was that someone had
taken them, covered them, moved them, or destroyed them. But nobody else than
her went past 5k, the last limit of the maintained zone, and the start of the
abandoned tunnel, west side. Still. She couldn't go further. One of the
conditions for her being allowed that far was that a constant line of light was
present between her and the rest of the human world. It was one of the few
rules she followed, mostly because it made sense, although she would have never
admitted that, prefering to refer to the authority who had decreed it. Keeping
a line of light, though, was the only way anyone would go in the abandoned
tunnel if she went missing or didn't get back. Accidents could always happen.
Besides, being completely isolated is nice in theory, but absolutely terrifying
in practice. It would certainly be nice to retreat to some island out there,
with nobody around for most of the year, and no worries whatsoever… but these
were dreams only, and had no way of ever happening. Right?

_No need to get sidetracked,_ she thought. _There's still the problem of how
this happened, what I'm going to do about it, when do I do that, and most
importantly,_ why _this is happening._ She sat down and began grumbling.
_Animals? Past the air lock, impossible. They could have gotten through from
the other side, and_ that _would be something. But why would they go and take
the Everfyre and then bring it back?_ Something was happened, but she couldn't
explain it. _Too little info. I need more data, and the only way to get it is
onwards._

She got up and looked into the darkness, then trembled briefly before letting
out a sigh:

- Illian, poor girl, you're going to need to ask someone to go with you. Just
  in case something — or someone — _is_ indeed in there. Just in case.

The words, without anyone in hearing range, bounced happily around the walls
and got lost. Merely five seconds later, in the darkness, a last remnant of an
echo reached a figure lying down on the smooth concrete. And, although you'll
just have to take my word for it, the tunnel in this part being pitch black,
nearly opaque, a smile formed on tired lips, before returning to the nothing,
and the figure returning to dreaming.