- You want me to go _where_?

That was the standard response to Illian's question today. Exasperated, she
fumed while walking away:

- Why is everyone here so fucking cowardly?!

- Language, Illian, language. You should understand… Fear is quite the powerful
  emotion, especially when one's life is routine.

- Uncle! I—

She turned, stopped, looked confused for an instant before flashing her eyes in
anger and swatting the boy standing there— or tried to, anyway. Mark was tall
for his mere twelve years, but still as springy as some of his younger friends,
and easily dodged. He laughed while jumping further back to avoid being
grabbed, and imitated another voice, producing deeper bass than his age should
have allowed, in a strange performance of a man's voice coming from a youth's
body.

- Aah, Illian, do you want me that much?

- You pathetic little— come here! Mark! I will strangle that voicebox of yours,
  come here you pest!

Keeping his distance, he dropped all pretense and, casually:

- Y'know, _I_ could go down with you.

- And why would I want that?

He raised an eyebrow and stopped jumping around. Illian, troubled, turned away
and mumbled an okay. She walked to the nearest service door, paused, hesitated,
then asked Mark to bring a knapsack and lunch.

- And get some sleep, you freak!

- We're not going right now?

- I want to get some air.

Spending days walking the length of the tunnel and nights sleeping in her room
under the lake might have been Illian's routine, but that didn't mean she had
forgone the outside. Much to the contrary! _I will go find something useful
from underneath, if the overside is barred to us._ Thus went her original
thought on the matter. Later she stopped making excuses, both for herself and
others, and just accepted she liked it down there. Hence, fresh air was, to her
only, a luxury, a treat to be given or taken depending on progress or, in
this case, lack thereofe. Reaching the surface was long enough but the view was
spectacular, taking away her breath everytime. Or maybe that was just the
altitude.

Perched up just a few meters down from the ridge line of the lake side
mountains, the E00 hatch  was the only manmade flaw as far as eye could see. On
that side, at least. From the northern side, one could see, on good days, the
shining walls of the Crossing Fort, and at night, the faint halo of the
permanent _veilleuse_ at the Lighthouse-on-the-Ridge. E01, the northern hatch,
was merely an observatory for these two. The lighthouse has not been lit and
bright in living memory, and many doubted it was still manned; watch was kept
out of tradition, and also because it provided a distraction to staring at the
seemingly random opening and closing of gates through binoculars for days on
end.

To the east, the tall strip of concrete of the highway was clearly visible. To
the west, there was mostly white fog, which marked the _dead zone_. So-called
_dead zones_ were a permanent result of the past. They had a constant layer of
something that looked like mist but seemed not to be affected by wind nor rain
nor sun nor anything else natural or otherwise. No wildlife came close. The
only things brave or foolish enough to come near were humans— but even we knew
not to go in nor get too close: _dead zones_ take but do not give back.

Going on a slightly angled east-west course, 300 metres below the surface, with
the peak of the mountains Illian was looking out of nearly 1k above ground, the
west end of the tunnel went right through the _dead zone_ — and according to
her own calculations, the fog started just a little after the 15k mark, which
meant she was already well into it, but from the underneath, and coming alive
and well for two months already! If she managed to reach the other side, it
would open a much faster route westward, as well as offer the possibility to
bore up and maybe get a peek at what was inside the _dead zone_ — or it could
go horribly wrong and she would die or worse. Which was mostly the reason she
didn't tell people how far she had gotten (also, keeping it a secret was all
sorts of giddying).

Illian shook herself awake and knocked on the hatch to signal she wanted back
in. The door opened quickly, and the doorman had a half smile on his face,
eyebrows a bit raised.

- I was just about to come out, see how you were doing.

- I almost fell asleep again. How long have I been out?

- Just over 20 minutes. Come inside before you freeze completely.

Illian went in and found with a bit of surprise she was actually cold. _Twenty
minutes! I really should get more sleep._ There was no heater at this level; no
need: the heat generated at the lower levels rose up through the exits and it
was always very warm. When the hatch was open, the wind currents generated by
the temperature differences could trip you up very easily, and not only
metaphorically. There were stories of small children being swept away by the
draft, and bashed again metal or rock. When groups of kids went up and out to
play or for dares or whatever it was kids do, they often scared themselves by
pointing out places and pretending to find stains. It was morbid, but in this
damned place and time, where death was — or used to be — common occurence,
morbid fun was just as good as the regular kind.

The exits were near vertical tunnels, wide of about 15 metres, that went from
service rooms, which were adjoining to the main tunnel, up to the surface, and
closed by heavy steel hatches. The stairs _en colimaçon_ were the only way to
travel along, and the rest of the space was filled with various tubes and pipes
that accomplished various functions Illian knew little about. And around it
all, and around people walking up or down or staying on the platforms situated
at regular intervals, presumably for maintenance purposes but nowadays used as
extra resting space, around it all was a constant flow of air. Warm air, cold
air, _tiède_ air, with the occasional burning hot burst or glacial wave. These
extremes were called out, and on a typical day you could hear cries of "Burn!"
or "Ice!" resonating out and into the main tunnel, faintly, and followed either
by silence (when nobody else got hit) or an entire choral of yells (in the
other case). And then there were facetious children who called either or
randomly, for the dubious pleasure of seeing everyone freeze and brace in
anticipation of something that would never come. There were some who ignored
everything, prefering to tempt fate, but mostly nobody thought of the sheep who
cried wolf occasionally. After all, better be safe than sorry, and these kinds
of pranks weren't very oft made.

All current service rooms and exits were as old as the tunnel itself,
presumably built at the same time. The original purpose of the tunnel was not
known, but since it was rediscovered nearly 35 years ago by an adventuring
party who had had the good idea to try and go _over_ the mountains instead of
_around_ (and lost more than half of the men to the cold), it had become the
refuge of a growing community. Yet, instead of being open to all who wanted to
stay or trade, Hidden Port, as it was called, was only known to those who lived
within, and few others. Commerce was done in Odinburg or at the Crossing Fort,
when, twice per week, a caravan travelled from the shores of the lake to the
two towns. There was actually a merchant camp at the base of the mountain, just
near the lake, which was populated at the solstices when Hidden Port sold the
richesses it had found in the ground or repaired from traded goods or retrieved
through other means during the past six months. The faire lasted a few weeks,
perhaps a month, before dying down again, and the lake town emptying once more.

Illian reached the service room and headed for the door just as a pull of air
caused the door she had just opened to slam shut. Apologising to the groans and
grunts of people not expecting the sudden noise, she opened the door carefully
this time, making sure to use the recommended technique of sliding a foot
against the front of the door while pulling it back with both hands: one hand
tensing, the other slack and ready to absorb shock in either direction if
necessary. She hadn't expected a pull: hatches are only opened once every hour
at the most, and opening a door at the same time as a hatch and its service
door are simultaneously open is an extremely rare event. Yet it happens. And
nobody likes the noise of a slamming door in the tunnel, as it travels through
the cavity twice and through the concrete thrice, creating a sharp _bang!_
followed by a low rumbling lasting well over a minute. But what travels almost
faster than the sound is the name of whoever made it happen, a particularly
nasty consequence of what was, after all, just a chance occurence accentuated
by carelessness, the same carelessness shown every day by dozens of vastly
different people. Still. Being mocked (by kids and petty adults, for the most
part, as well as acquaintances of varying levels of friendship) for a week was
not a very pleasant experience.

Her only comfort was that she would be at the far end of the tunnel for the
most part of the week. _I wonder when classes will be back. Not that I miss
them or anything._ She was lying to herself, as classes were the best thing she
had besides exploring the tunnel, at least until the next solstice. _Besides,
knowledge can't hurt,_ she thought, remembering the last time a young truant
had tried to demonstrate the relationship between learning and headaches, in a
particularly spectacular and entertaining attempt at escaping class time. Her
reasoning was quite complete, and under little scrutiny, could pass off as
valid, but arguing it back and forth had actually taken more time than the
lesson would have, to the horror and _dépit_ of the student, and the amusement
of the more senior members of the class.

Illian, day-dreaming, had walked further away than her own quarters by
inadvertence and was now in the old _quartier grec_ which was once a place of
litterature and music, but a decade ago a disgruntled artist had set himself
on fire and the section had to be shut off for four months until the smell of
burnt flesh got out of the air — in such a confined space, BBQ isn't the best
party — and by then it had gotten a bad reputation. The literary folks moved
elsewhere, and when the _quartier grec_ reopened permanently it became the home
of the unhappy, the maladjusted, and the antipathic. Nevertheless, Illian liked
the place. She had helped a few of its residents tidy it up, using her
experience of finding and disposing of weird or disgusting things in the tunnel
to clean out everything that didn't belong and restore the old room to the
appearance of its former glory. The same people continued to stay and meet
there, but discussions were livelier and thus the _quartier_ became the home to
most alternative politics in the community. She liked hanging out there after
school, playing checkers with the anarchists and weiqi with neo-imperialists.
As an added bonus, not many parents let their children go there, thus the calm
was strangely softly soothing.

